---
title: "Development and Application of Multiscale Modelling Techniques for Biochemical Processes"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/Chem_Eur_J_2022
excerpt: 'Complete PhD thesis written in partial fulfilment of the requirements to obtain the degree Doctor of Science: General Track'
date: 2022-06-07
venue: 'KU Leuven'
paperurl: 'http://NeilMcFarlane-gh.github.io/files/NRM_PhD_thesis.pdf'
citation: ''
---

***Abstract:*** In every organism, all occurring biochemical processes are in some way interconnected. Such complexity means that studying a given organism in its complete form is typically unfeasible, and so great effort goes into constructing small models which represent the most interesting parts of a given organism. This thesis is concerned with the use of computational modelling techniques to aid in understanding biochemical processes. Due to the different sizes and rates on which biochemical processes occur, a multiscale modelling approach is necessitated. Chapter 1 explores the use of multiscale modelling techniques for the study of biochemical processes in a general sense and provides the biochemical context for the systems studied in detail in this thesis. Chapter 2 summarises the necessary theory behind the computational chemistry methods used in this thesis. The theory is not provided exhaustively, but at a level of detail appropriate for this thesis. In Chapter 3, existing multiscale modelling techniques are used to study the only known NO receptor in humans, soluble guanylate cyclase, which upon binding NO sees a large increase in catalytic activity. The exact details behind NO binding to the regulatory domain of soluble guanylate cyclase remain poorly understood by experiment, and moreover the atomistic nature of the signalling pathway caused by NO binding is unclear. In this chapter, the binding of NO gas to the regulatory part of soluble guanylate cyclase is studied by high-level quantum mechanical cluster calculations on a small model, and with hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics calculations on the complete regulatory domain. In conjunction, the conformational changes caused by NO binding and the diffusion of NO gas into the regulatory domain are studied by molecular dynamics simulations. Ultimately, these calculations and simulations are considered in a biological context, enabling a more complete understanding of this regulatory protein. Chapter 4 explores another protein in which NO gas binds, cystathionine β-synthase. In this case, CO may also bind, and instead of increasing activity as for soluble guanylate cyclase, CO/NO binding results in complete inhibition of enzymatic activity. Experimentally, several models associated with CO/NO binding have been proposed, but the conformational changes following CO/NO binding causing inhibition remain ambiguous. Initially, high-level quantum mechanical cluster calculations on a small model are used to verify the spectroscopic models proposed for CO/NO binding. Following this, the conformational changes caused by CO/NO binding on the inhibited forms of cystathionine β-synthase are investigated with extended molecular dynamics simulations of the complete protein, enabling an understanding of signalling pathways of up to 25 Å in length. In addition to the application of existing methodologies in Chapters 3 and 4, Chapter 5 is concerned with the development and implementation of a new technique for studying biochemical reactivity – the single-ended growing string method. While the algorithm itself is not novel, this represents the first implementation into the hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics framework. Following the implementation, the algorithm has been verified against a biochemical test case, the Claisen rearrangement catalysed by chorismate mutase. For the initial test case, the algorithm works effectively, with as much as 88% of the reaction pathways produced deemed to be of publication quality, and can be generated quickly and efficiently. Further testing on more complicated biochemical systems is required, but this initial case study shows promising results. On the relatively large dataset produced, a statistical analysis has been performed on the underlying distribution of activation energies calculated by hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics. Previously, the distribution was considered to be Gaussian in nature, but the analysis performed here reveals that a slight positive skewness is more likely.
